Let's break down interstitial lung
disease, or ILD.
This is a group of disorders that cause
progressive scarring of lung tissue,
leading to stiff, noncompliant lungs.
The key idea is this.
ILD is a restrictive disease.
Unlike asthma or COPD, this is not an
airflow problem.
It's a volume problem.
The lungs cannot expand normally because
fibrosis makes them stiff.
Here's the cause to effect flow.
Something triggers inflammation in the
interstitium, which is the space
between the alveoli and capillaries.
Over time, that inflammation turns into
fibrosis.
That scarring thickens the alveolar
membrane, slows diffusion,
and leads to hypoxemia.
Clinically, patients usually present with
progressive shortness of breath,
a dry, nonproductive cough, and reduced
exercise tolerance.
On auscultation, you'll often hear fine
crackles,
sometimes described as Velcro-like.
One key respiratory therapy clue is that
oxygen levels drop with activity before they
drop at rest.
Diagnostics follow a classic pattern.
Pulmonary function tests show a
restrictive pattern with decreased FVC and a normal or
increased FEV1 to FVC ratio.
ABGs may show early respiratory alkalosis,
but as the disease
progresses, hypoxemia becomes more
prominent.
Imaging, especially CT, may show ground
glass opacities, reticular patterns, or
honeycombing.
Watch for red flags.
Increasing oxygen requirements, worsening
dyspnea, and
signs of pulmonary hypertension all
suggest progression.
These patients can decline gradually or
sometimes rapidly.
Management focuses on slowing progression
and supporting oxygenation.
Many patients require supplemental oxygen,
especially during activity.
Antifibrotic medications may be used
depending on the type of ILD.
Pulmonary rehab can improve function, and
in advanced cases,
lung transplant may be considered.
As a respiratory therapist, your role is
critical.
You are monitoring oxygenation trends,
assessing work of breathing,
and identifying early signs of decline.
You also help titrate oxygen and educate
patients on proper use and expectations.
For board prep, remember this pattern.
Progressive dyspnea, dry cough,
restrictive PFTs,
and fibrotic changes on imaging point
toward ILD.
The main takeaway is that ILD is about
stiff lungs that cannot oxygenate effectively.
Your job is to recognize it, support the
patient,
and know when things are getting worse.